# Research Log

## January 19th, 2023

Today I set up my GitHub Repository.

## February 16th, 2023 - Datasets Description 

I have uploaded two fan-made datasets related to the choose-your-own-adventure-style visual novel app _Choices_: Stories You Play. One of them contains the view counts and provided keywords for each story available in the _Choices_ app. I copied it from the _Choices_ Wiki Statistics page and pasted it into Excel so that I could save it as a .csv file. The other dataset contains the “diamond” costs for each _Choices_ story. The diamond costs dataset was created by a fan and uploaded to the _Choices_ subreddit (r/choices). I also copied it into an Excel sheet and saved it as a .csv file. 

_Choices_ Wiki Statistics Dataset: https://choices-stories-you-play.fandom.com/wiki/Statistics 
The columns organizing the values in this dataset are “Book Name,” “Views,” and “Keywords.” There are 120 rows representing the 120 titles released in the app prior to 2023. On the Wiki webpage, one can choose whether they want to view the order of the values in the table by view count or alphabetically according to book name or keywords. The version that I copied to Excel and uploaded to GitHub is ordered by the number of views, with the first value being the book with the highest view count. The _Choices_ app changed its UI in 2020 and no longer provides data on the number of views for stories, so the “views” column has not been updated since September 2nd, 2020, but it is likely the most accurate way to determine the popularity level of the stories released prior to that date. Additionally, the Wiki page states that it is unknown what gets counted as “views.” The views values were collected directly from the app, but it is unclear if it accounts for the number of times a chapter was started or completed, the number of players who completed the book, or whether replays are counted as unique views. Moreover, the “Book Name” and “Keywords” columns appear to be up-to-date as of December 2022 (although I have noticed at least one missing book, which began releasing weekly chapters in late November), but the dataset does not yet include any books from this year, so there are some gaps to fill. I also think the keywords would be helpful for expanding the dataset to group the titles further or categorize them based on genre.

_Choices_ Diamond Costs Dataset: https://www.reddit.com/r/Choices/comments/ixskc4/to_save_or_not_to_save_diamonds_edition_no/ 
Every _Choices_ story has exclusive scenes, character outfits and hairstyles, which cost “diamonds” to unlock. Players can purchase diamonds or receive them as rewards from reading new chapters, completing books, and watching ads. Using information from the _Choices_ Wiki, a fan calculated the total number of diamond costs for each book and broke down the costs according to various categories. The columns in this dataset are “Book Title,” “Total Diamonds,” “Outfits With Effects,” “Outfits/Hair No Effect,” “LI’s With Effect,” “LI’s No Effect,” “Other With Effect,” and “Other No Effect.” “LI” means ‘love interest,’ referring to the characters with whom the main character can pursue romantic relationship routes if the player chooses. “With Effects” refers to stories with an approval rating that can affect the outcome of the story. Approval ratings may relate to relationships the player has forged with other characters depending on their choices or more general storyline approval that relates to another aspect of the plot. The books that had not finished releasing chapters at the time this dataset was made were left blank. This dataset was created two years ago and has not been updated since, so there are many values that could be added to the existing columns. 

## February 28th, 2023 - Data Gaps and Proposals for Filling Them 

**Wiki Stats Dataset:**

•	**Key words and genre:** The keywords listed for each book provide hints about their genres, but the dataset does not specify them. However, the _Choices_ app has a page that sorts some of the books by genre. To expand the dataset, I could potentially add a “genre” column using the genre designation given by the app for some books and using the keywords to make inferences about books without a listed genre. I could also look at the Wiki pages for each book, which tend to list a genre (although that genre is often simply “romance”). To expand the dataset in this way, I would need to decide how to define “genre” and would probably end up with more than one genre value for many books. Moreover, I could split the “Keywords” column into “Keyword 1,” “Keyword 2,” and “Keyword 3” as that organization seems more logical and easier to follow than its current format. 

•	**Dates:** While the _Choices_ Wiki pages list the start and end dates for each book’s release, this information is not included in either of the datasets with which I am working. Thus, I could use the information from the Wiki pages to add “Release Start Date” and “Release End Date” columns to the dataset. Perhaps I could also use this information to calculate the release time for each book and add a “Release Time” column. Alternatively, I could simplify this information by creating a "Release Year" column and including only the years for each release (although I do not see a good reason for taking that approach). 

•	**Series vs. stand-alone:** Whether a _Choices_ book receives a sequel or becomes an ongoing series is a major point of discussion within the fandom. Thus, I think it could be useful for this dataset to include information about whether the books are single releases or part of a series. I could obtain this information from either the _Choices_ app or the Wiki. However, I am unsure of the best way to organize this information in the dataset. I could have a column with values that list the book as a stand-alone or part of a series, and I could possibly add another column that specifies what number a book is within its series (or I could try to combine this information into one column), but I do not know if that would be the most effective way to go about it. 

•	**Gender:** This dataset does not include any information about the books’ characters. Whether the main characters that readers play as for each book are gender of choice or locked as a specific gender is a major area of contention between fans and the story creators. So, I could add a column that specifies whether or not the main characters are gender locked, perhaps by adding a “Main Character’s Gender” column. Also, I could add another column to include information about the pronoun options offered for gender-of-choice books since they only recently began including they/them pronouns.

•	**Love interest characters:** Since there is no information about book characters in this dataset, I think it would be interesting to compile information about the number of love interest characters in each book, the genders of each love interest, and whether their genders/names/appearances are customizable. However, doing so would be time consuming since I would have to search the Wiki page for each book to obtain this information. 

•	**View counts:** As I mentioned in my last research log entry, not even the creators of this dataset know how the view count values were calculated since the _Choices_ app did not specify what it considered a “view.” If I knew a “view” was in this context and somehow obtained more complete information on it, I could potentially break down this category further by separating unique views from replays, or I could divide the view counts by completed books and/or chapters versus views that may have come from someone starting a book/chapter and not finishing it. 

**Diamond Costs Dataset:**

•	**Number of chapters:** Using information obtained from either the app or the Wiki pages, I could add a column to this dataset that lists the number of chapters in each book. One could then use that information to calculate the average diamond cost per chapter for any given book since the original dataset includes the total number of diamond costs for each book.

•	**Number of diamond scenes:** The _Choices_ walkthrough Wiki pages list every diamond scene that appears in a book. I could use that information to calculate the total number of diamond scene options that appear in each book and add a “Number of Diamond Scenes” column to the dataset (although doing so would probably take a long time). One could then use this information to calculate the average cost of a diamond scene for a given book. 

•	**“Other” categories:** I think I could break down the two “other” categories in this dataset to make them more specific. However, doing so would require researching extensively the situations where diamond scenes have no effect on the story or character relationships. I would then have to determine how to categorize these situations into categories more specific than “other” but still general enough to encompass multiple values, which would be a lot of work. 

## March 13th, 2023 - Filling a Data Gap

**Wiki Stats Dataset:**

To fill data gaps in the _Choices_ Wiki Stats dataset, I added columns to indicate the release year and the gender of the main character--the character from whose point-of-view the reader plays--for each book. To do so, I added “MC’s Gender” and “Release Year” columns. There are two possible values for the “MC’s Gender” column: female or gender-of-choice (GOC). While many books are gender-locked as female, meaning one can play the book only as a female character, none of them are gender-locked as male. Thus, books that are not gender-locked as female are listed as GOC. Additionally, some of the values in the “Release Year” column list more than one year (e.g., 2020-2021), indicating that the book began releasing chapters in the first year listed and finished the following year. To obtain information about the main characters’ genders and book release years to add to the dataset, I consulted the individual Wiki walkthrough pages for each book. For some of the books I have played before, I relied on memory and did not have to look at the Wiki when inputting the gender, but I did double-check the year values using the Wiki page for all of them. I also changed the “Keywords” column to three separate columns, “Keyword 1,” “Keyword 2,” and “Keyword 3,” because I find it easier to read in that format. 

Whether a book is gender-locked or gender-of-choice is an area of contention between fans and the creators of the app. Pixelberry Studios recently released a statement saying that it has heard fans’ requests and will try to expand the number of GOC books it releases starting in 2024. Because of this reason, I thought it would be interesting to compare the gender distribution across books. If players consulted this dataset, they would be able to determine which books best suit their needs based on the gender(s) they wish to play as. Additionally, this information provides an interesting way of determining who Pixelberry views as its target demographics (primarily heterosexual women for the first few years of the app's existence, based on the MC genders and book content) and how these demographics may have changed over time. For instance, coupling this information with the “Release Year” column, one may attempt to determine when increases in the number of GOC books began to occur.

Moreover, some (albeit very few) of the GOC books allow the player to make their character non-binary. Currently, I have categorized these books as “GOC” without indicating the option for non-binary characters. To indicate whether a GOC book allows for non-binary characters, I could add a fourth value, such as “GOC + NB.” However, because there are so few books that allow non-binary main characters and the decision to add non-binary main character options occurred only in the last year or so, I decided to leave “GOC” as an umbrella term that encompasses both these books and GOC books that adhere to the gender binary. I believe that adding a value to indicate which books allow non-binary main character options would be more useful in the future after the app releases more of these books. 

**Diamond Cost Dataset:**

To expand the _Choices_ Diamond Cost dataset, I added a “Chapters” column, which indicates the number of chapters in each book. I obtained this information from the books’ Wiki pages and the _Choices_ app itself, switching between these two mediums depending on what seemed more convenient as I worked. I chose to add this column because one could use it along with the “Total Diamonds” column to calculate the average diamond cost for each chapter of a given book, which could be useful to fans trying to budget their diamonds or determine roughly how many they would need to buy all the diamond scenes in one chapter of a certain book. 

I also added rows to the datasets as I worked. Since the diamond cost dataset was made a couple of years ago, it was missing some of the recent books that were included in the Wiki stats dataset, so I added them. However, when making these additions, I did not fill in the values for any of the columns except for the “Chapters” one that I added (books that are currently releasing have the current number of released chapters and "(unfinished)" written as the value under the "Chapters" column). Adding the other values would require more math than I wanted to do, but I might fill them in later before I create a visualization of the data. I may also fill in the missing data values that were already in the original dataset when I downloaded it. Moreover, there were three or four recent books missing from both datasets, so I added those as well. For the books that I added to the Wiki stats dataset, I filled out the data values for each column because the information was easily accessible online and did not require me to do math. Additionally, some of the book titles in one dataset were incorrect, so I changed them. For example, I changed a book that was listed as “Desire & Decorum Holiday Edition” to its proper title, “Desire & Decorum: First Winter.” 

## April 4th, 2023 - Historicizing the Data 

When working with fan-made datasets, it can be difficult to find details of their origins since the stakes of creating a fandom dataset for fun during one’s free time are quite different from the stakes of obtaining data through an academic study. Given the nature of fandom work like this, transparency is not emphasized in the data collection process. Thus, the information I have found on the origins of both datasets is quite limited. 

**Diamond Costs Dataset:**
The _Choices_ diamond costs dataset was originally posted to the _Choices_ subreddit on September 22nd, 2020 by u/IssaSpida. While the post contains an explanation of what the column headings mean in the dataset, it does not explain how the information was calculated or where it was obtained. However, considering that most of the detailed information that exists about _Choices_ and its books is available on the Wiki page for the app, it is reasonable to assume that the information included in the dataset was taken from the Wiki walkthroughs for each book. The Wiki walkthrough for any _Choices_ book lists every choice available in each chapter along with the diamond costs for premium choices. Many of the Wiki walkthroughs also include information about whether a diamond choice affects a relationship with another character or an overall approval rating related to the story. Since the creator of the dataset states in their original post that they “have not played every book”—which, they acknowledge, may have affected where they input certain information in the dataset—I assume that they took the diamond choices listed in the Wiki walkthrough pages for each book and added them together to calculate the totals for each column. To have made such calculations without using the Wiki pages, they would have had to play each book and write down the diamond costs as they read. 

u/IssaSpida’s post contains a link to another post they made on September 25th, 2020, which was a compilation of spoiler-free notes on each book, meant to complement the diamond costs dataset and help other players determine whether they wanted to save diamonds to spend on certain books. Unfortunately, the Reddit moderators have since removed the notes post, so I am unable to view it. I assume that the notes post would contain more information about or additional context for the dataset, but I cannot say for sure. 

At the time of the dataset’s creation, there were several books releasing chapters weekly. In their post, u/IssaSpida writes that they have chosen to leave the data entries for these books blank until they finished releasing. According to their replies to comments on the original post, they did update a few of these books, but not all of them. Thus, the information in the original dataset has likely not been updated since late 2021 or early 2022. On February 20th, 2022, u/IssaSpida wrote in a comment that they “stopped playing Choices about a year ago” and were not adding any new books to the dataset. 

Wiki Stats Dataset: 
It is even more difficult to determine the origins of the Wiki Stats dataset because it was not created by one person. Yet, I can see [the list of contributions and changes made to the page in chronological order](https://choices-stories-you-play.fandom.com/wiki/Statistics?offset=&limit=500&action=history), which offers a good timeline of the page’s life. The page was originally created by Wiki user Jadelady on May 21, 2020. In addition to Jadelady, contributions to the Wiki were made by users JoedanWong, ILoveHarley, Aurogon, Gasol95, CoolQuantumcyJoker, MarmaladeKukki, ManuNakeli, EvrenBot, HotBlackSuit, and General Kohr. The majority of the Wiki contributions were made by Jadelady, JoedanWong, and CoolQuantumcyJoker. Jadelady and JoedanWong stopped contributing in early 2022, and most of the contributions in the past year were made by CoolQuantumcyJoker, with the most recent update occurring on March 16th, 2023. Currently, the Wiki is locked so that only certain groups can edit the page, and most of the recent updates have been small visual changes. However, I was surprised to see that the Wiki is still being updated today. 

The information included in the dataset was taken directly from _Choices_ itself when the view counts were publicly available on the app. It is unclear if this information was downloaded/ extracted from the app and uploaded to the Wiki table or if it was entered by hand. 

